<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
	<title>ಶ್ರೀರಾಮಕೃಷ್ಣ ಪರಮಹಂಸ</title>
	<link type="text/css" rel="stylesheet" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body class="maintext">
	<div class="footnote">
		<aside epub:type="footnote">
			<p class="footnote-head">Footnotes</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-fn-001">
			<p>*pp. 25--76. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism.</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-002">
			<p>1 Refer Gould (2008).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-003">
			<p>2 <a href="https://swadeshiindology.com/si-2/position-papers/">https://swadeshiindology.com/si-2/position-papers/</a></p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-004">
			<p>3 The disproportionate (in relation to the volume of the dates used in his scholarship) and mostly unreferenced data in Appendix B.1 (Pollock:2006; 597) is clearly the solitary exception.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-005">
			<p>4 Unless specified otherwise, Outsiders and Insiders used throughout this paper are in the sense seen in Malhotra, Rajiv (2016). <em>Insiders versus Outsiders: Who speaks for our heritage?</em> <a href="https://battleforsanskrit.com/insiders-versus-outsiders/">https://battleforsanskrit.com/insiders-versus-outsiders/</a></p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-006">
			<p>5 Refer Malhotra, Rajiv (2014) <em>Indra’s Net,</em> Chapter Conclusion: The ‘Poison Pill’ for Protection of Hinduism.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-007">
			<p>6 Refer Pollock (2003:84), Footnote 9.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-008">
			<p>7 Refer <a href="https://drive.google.com/file/d/13PTG4h9XSxFEFRzQBVc20UndCYM7v8hH/view">https://drive.google.com/file/d/13PTG4h9XSxFEFRzQBVc20UndCYM7v8hH/view</a></p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-009">
			<p>8  Refer in particular to:</p>
			<ol>
				<li>Mankad (1951) Part III, Chapter I: Chandragupta Maurya and the Greek evidence; Chapter II: The Greek evidence and the Guptas; Chapter III: The Priyadasi Inscriptions; Chapter IV: The Gupta Era</li>
				<li>Venkatachelam, Kota (1953) Chapter II: 4. Modern Indian Historical Research, 5. Puranic Chronology as given by Sir William Jones, 6. Puranic History as understood by Sir William Jones, 8. Conjecture of Sir William Jones, 10. Concocted chronology of Jones, 12. Misrepresentation of Jones; Chapter IV: 20. Foundation of the False History of Bharat, 21. Max-Muller’s Arbitrary and False conclusion; Chapter V: 35. Tampering with the verses by Partiger, 36. Historical literature of India (Stein, Wilson, Col. Tod); Chapter VIII: 48. Inscriptions, 49. Misrepresentation of Kharavela's inscription; Appendix III: Important Dates in Indian History; Appendix: IV: Some Major errors in Modern Indian History</li>
				<li>Raja Ram Mohan Roy (2015) Chapter 5: Sandrokottos vs. Sandrokottos</li>
			</ol>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-001-en-010">
			<p>9 See Narayana Sastry (1916) Chapter 1 - Method of Investigation, for a brief appraisal on prevailing colonial methods.</p>
			<p><strong><em>Editor's Note</em>:</strong> The paper was received in 2016, selected for presentation in the first Swadeshi Indology Conference. Further, the order in which the names appear as the authors of the paper, does not indicate seniority or hierarchy of any kind between the authors.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-002-fn-001">
			<p>*pp. 77--104. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-003-fn-001">
			<p>*pp. 105--134. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism.</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India. </p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-003-en-002">
			<p>1 India itself cannot be viewed only as a bundle of the old and the new, accidentally and uncomfortably pieced together, an artificial construct without a natural unity. Nor is she just a repository of quaint, fashionable accessories to Western lifestyles; nor a junior partner in a global capitalist world. India is its own distinct and unified civilization with a proven ability to manage profound differences, engage creatively with various cultures, religions and philosophies, and peacefully integrate many diverse streams of humanity. These values are based on ideas about divinity, the cosmos and humanity that stand in contrast to the fundamental assumptions of Western civilization.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-003-en-003">
			<p>2 <strong>World Systems Analysis</strong> (Wallerstein 2004): </p>
			<p>World Systems analysis is a methodology a few decades old, pioneered by Immanuel Wallerstein, and taken up and developed by many mainstream scholars. This is an attempt to systematically, and falsifiably (hence scientifically), set up a framework to analyze social events in a unidisciplinary way. The reason why it makes an appealing contrast to patently unscientific hypotheses like Axiality is that these have a built in history of Western Universalistic axioms that are not possibly to explicitly falsify(being based on authoritativeness, but can be seen increasingly to be less and less applicable to societies that do not share the peculiarities of Western European history.</p>
			<p>Being unidisciplinary is to eschew the historical problems, involving the way disciplines in current social science have evolved from a Eurocentric base. It puts categories of time and space in a frame with a beginning and end, i.e. understandable limits. Time is based on the ‘<em>longue duree</em>’, lasting from the beginning to the end of the particular ‘world system’. The geographical space is the space which functions as a ‘world’ with its own multiple nation-states with their own production processes and interstate trade and other interactions, e.g. the Mediterranean world.</p>
			<p>Wallerstein and others have established that the European world since the industrial revolution can be seen as a prototypical world-system, a system that, moreover, has over the centuries expanded to encompass most of the globe today, and a system that is in its end stages now.</p>
			<p>While this system needs much more development and broadening to be really applicable to our topic at hand, i.e. ancient Indian history, its value lies in the fact that we can see it as a clear mirror that can show up the problems and plain incapability of the current systems of social science to show a satisfactory model of ancient India. Needless to say, one key category that India and other non-Western civilizations can add to the world systems is the <em>ādhyātmika</em> aspect; since the current European Enlightenment based systems – even world-systems – only have an ill-suited and narrowly relevant category of “Religion” to cover a vast aspect of human personal and social life.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-fn-001">
			<p>*pp. 135--162. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-002">
			<p>1 They call him Indra, Mitra, Varuṇa, Agni, and he is heavenly nobly-winged Garutman. To what is One, sages give many a title they call it Agni, Yama, Mātariśvan.</p>
			<p class="text-right"><em>- Ṛgveda.</em> 1.164.46</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-003">
			<p>2 “Buddha carries on the tradition of absolutism so clearly set forth in the Upaniṣads. For both, the Real is the Absolute which is at once transcendent to thought and, immanent in phenomena. Both take <em>avidyā</em>, the beginningless and cosmic Ignorance as the root-cause of phenomenal existence and suffering. Both believe that thought is inherently fraught with contradictions and thought-categories, <em>instead of</em> revealing the Real distort it, and therefore, one should rise above all views, all theories, all determinations, all thought-constructions in order to realize the Real. For both, the Real is realized in immediate spiritual experience. Both prescribe moral conduct and spiritual discipline as means to realize the Real, the fearless goal, the abode of Bliss”.</p>
			<p class="text-right">(Sharma 2007: 31-32)(<em>spelling and italics as in the original</em>)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-004">
			<p>3  These fourteen questions are – Is the world eternal? Or not? Or both? Or Neither?; Is the world finite? Or not? Or both? Or neither?; Does the Tathagata exist after death? Or not? Or both? Or neither?; Is the soul identical with the body? Or not?</p>
			<p class="text-right"><em>- Poṭṭhapāda Sutta</em> 25-27</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-005">
			<p>4  “If I, Ananda, when the wandering monk Vachhagotta asked me: ‘Is there the ego?’ had answered: ‘The ego is’ then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctrine of the Sramanas and Brahmins who believe in permanence (of the ego). If I, Ananda, had answered: ‘The ego is not’, then that, Ananda, would have confirmed the doctrine of the Sramanas and Brahmins, who believe in annihilation (of the ego).”</p>
			<p class="text-right"><em>Saṁyutta Nikāya</em> - 44, 10 (Oldenberg 1882: 272-273)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-006">
			<p>5  Certain scholar opines that Buddha’s silence was due to his absolutist stand about Ultimate Reality. Thus, Chandradhar Sharma (2007: 17) says: “The ‘silence’ of Buddha on the fourteen metaphysical questions does not indicate his ignorance of metaphysics or his agnosticism or his nihilism. It indicates his absolutism by revealing that contradictions are inherent in thought and can be solved only by rising to immediate spiritual experience”.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-007">
			<p>6 “To develop his theory, Buddha had only to rid the Upaniṣads of their inconsistent compromises with Vedic polytheism and religion, set aside the transcendental aspect as being indemonstrable to thought and unnecessary to morals, and emphasis the ethical universalism of the Upaniṣads. Early Buddhism, we venture to hazard a conjecture, is only a restatement of the thought of the Upaniṣads from a new standpoint.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">Radhakrishnan (2013: Vol.1 303)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-008">
			<p>7  “The Tathāgata sometimes taught that the <em>ātman</em> exists and at other times he taught that the <em>ātman</em> does not exist. When he preached that the <em>ātman</em> exists and is to be the receiver of misery or happiness in the successive life as the reward of its own Karma, his object was to save men from falling into the heresy of Nihilism (<em>Uccheda-vāda</em>). When he taught that there is no <em>ātman</em> in the sense of a creator or perceiver or an absolutely free agent, apart from the conventional name given to the aggregate of the five <em>skandhas</em>, his object was to save men from falling into the opposite, heresy of Eternalism (<em>Śāśvata-vāda</em>). Now which of these two views represents the truth? It is doubtless the doctrine of the denial of <em>ātman</em>. This doctrine, which is so difficult to understand, was not intended by Buddha for the ears of those whose intellect is dull and in whom the root of goodness has not thriven. And why? Because such men by hearing the doctrine of <em>anātman</em> would have been sure to fall into the heresy of Nihilism. The two doctrines were preached by Buddha for two very different objects. He taught the existence of <em>ātman</em> when he wanted to impart to his hearers the conventional doctrine; he taught the doctrine of <em>anātman</em> when he wanted to impart to them the transcendental doctrine.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">(<em>Prajñāpāramita Sūtra, Nāgārjuna).</em></p>
			<p>“The existence of the <em>ātman</em> and of the <em>Dharmas</em> (i.e., of the <em>Ego</em> and of the phenomenal world) is affirmed in the Sacred Canon only provisionally and hypothetically, and never in the sense of their possessing a real and permanent nature.” (<em>Dharmapāla in his commentary on the Vijñānamātra-śāstra)</em>.</p>
			<p class="text-right">Sogen (2009: 19).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-009">
			<p>8  Upaniṣad-s says <em>sarvaṁ khalu idaṁ brahma.</em> Everything in this universe is Brahman including human beings. That means we are already <em>Brahman</em>, the Ultimate Reality, by essence. Yet, ironically, Upaniṣad-s instructs us to ‘attain <em>Brahma-Vidyā</em> and realize <em>Brahman’</em>. People may feel this is contradictory. But in fact, this is not so because Upaniṣad-s only indicates that there is an unknown entity in us that prevents us from knowing that we are <em>Brahman</em>. This unknown entity is called <em>avidyā</em>.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-010">
			<p>9  “These, O brethren, are those other things, profound, difficult to realize, hard to understand, tranquillizing, sweet, not to be grasped by mere logic, subtle, comprehensible only by the wise, which the Tathāgata, having himself realized and seen face to face, hath set forth; and it is concerning these that they who would rightly 	praise the Tathāgata in accordance with the truth, should speak.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">- <em>Brahma Jāla Sutta</em>. Davids (1923: 30).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-011">
			<p>10  “The Upaniṣadic seers and the Advaita Vedāntins use the word <em>ātmā</em> in the sense of the pure transcendent subject, which is at once pure consciousness and bliss. Buddha and the Buddhists, on the other hand, use the word <em>ātmā</em> in the sense of an empirical ego or in the sense of an eternal individual substance and reject its ultimate reality, while accepting its empirical validity…… In Buddha and Mahāyāna, the denial of the self is its denial as an eternal substance; it is not the denial of the absolute Self. Anātmavada or nairātmyavāda is really the nirahaṅkāra-nirmama-vāda of Vedānta. It denies neither the empirical validity of the ego nor the ultimate reality of the Absolute Self. It is the denial only of the false notion which mistakes the empirical ego as an eternal spiritual substance and attempts to objectify the subject and realize it through thought-categories. To take the self as an eternal substance is to cling to it eternally and this is <em>avidyā</em> which is the root-cause of all attachment, desire, misery and bondage.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">Sharma(2007: 26, 27) (<em>spellings/diacritics and italics as in the original</em>)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-012">
			<p>11  “There is, O Bhikkhus, an unborn, unoriginated, uncreated, unformed. Were there not, O Bhikkhus, this unborn, unoriginated, uncreated, unformed, there would be no escape from the world of the born, originated, created, formed. Since, O Bhikkhus, there is an unborn, unoriginated, uncreated, unformed, therefore is there an escape from the born, originated, created, formed.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">Strong (1902: 112)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-013">
			<p>12  It is not just <em>nirvāṇa</em> that is similar to Upaniṣadic Brahman. <em>Vijñaptimātra</em>, the Highest Reality posited by Yogācāra school of Mahāyāna, is also very similar to Brahman. Surendranath Dasgupta writes:</p>
			<p class="myquote">“As a ground of this ālayavijñāna we have the pure consciousness called the <em>vijñaptimātra</em>, which is beyond all experiences, transcendent and pure consciousness, pure bliss, eternal, unchangeable and unthinkable. It is this one pure being as pure consciousness and pure bliss, eternal and unchangeable like the Brahman of the Vedānta, that forms the ultimate ground and ultimate essence of all appearance; even the ālayavijñāna is an imposition of it, as are all the different states of it which make the world-order possible…… Thus we see that the ultimate reality is one, being self-identical, pure consciousness and pure bliss, which is thus different from the Tathatā of Aśvaghosha and very similar to the Brahman of the Upanishads.” </p>
			<p class="text-right">Dasgupta (1933:119-120) (<em>diacritics/spellings and italics as in the original</em>)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-014">
			<p>13  Post--Śaṅkara Advaitin-s are divided on this topic. This topic is outside the purview of this paper.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-015">
			<p>14  Twelve Chain of causation – 1) Beginning less and cosmic Ignorance, <em>Avidyā</em>. 2) Impressions of kārmic forces, <em>Saṁskāra</em>. 3) Individual consciousness, <em>Vijñāna</em>. 4) Psycho-physical organism, <em>Nāmarūpa</em>. 5) Six sense-organs including <em>manas</em>, <em>Ṣaḍāyatana</em>. 6) Sense-object-contact, <em>Sparśa</em>. 7) Sensation, <em>Vedanā</em>. 8) Desire for sense-enjoyment. <em>Tṛṣṇā</em>. 9) Clinging to sense enjoyment, <em>Upādana</em>. 10) Will to be born for experiencing sense-enjoyment, <em>Bhava</em>. 11) Birth including rebirth, <em>Jāti</em>. 12) Disintegration and death, <em>Janana-maraṇa</em></p>
			<p class="text-right">- <em>Mahānidāna Sutta</em>.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-016">
			<p>15 “Although there must have been existed a complicated process in formulating the Twelve Link formula, it is undeniable that it is analogous in its way of formulation to the formulas set forth by other philosophical systems of India, such as Sāṁkhya-Yoga.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">Nakamura (1987: 69)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-017">
			<p>16 <em>Udana</em>, 73; <em>Suttanipata, RatanSutta; Itivuttaka</em>, 112; <em>Dhammapada</em>, 18, etc.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-018">
			<p>17 “The only metaphysics that can justify Buddha’s ethical discipline is the metaphysics underlying the Upaniṣads. Buddhism is only a later phase of the general movement of thought of which the Upaniṣads were the earlier.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">- Radhakrishnan (2013: 470)</p>
			<p>“The Śākyan mission was out ‘not to destroy, but to fulfill’, to enlarge and enhance the accepted faith-in-God of their day, not by asseverating, but by making it more vital.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">Rhys-Davids(1932: 194)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-019">
			<p>18 “The Upaniṣadic seers and Buddha both are opposed to the view of realistic pluralism that the self is an ultimate individual substance and that there is a plurality of such eternal selves. Buddha carries on the tradition of absolutism so clearly set forth in the Upaniṣads. For both, the Real is the Absolute which is at once transcendent to thought and, immanent in phenomena. Both take <em>avidyā</em>, the beginningless and cosmic Ignorance as the root-cause of phenomenal existence and suffering. Both believe that thought is inherently fraught with contradictions and thought-categories, <em>instead of</em> revealing the Real distort it, and therefore, one should rise above all views, all theories, all determinations, all thought-constructions in order to realize the Real. For both, the Real is realized in immediate spiritual experience. Both prescribe moral conduct and spiritual discipline as means to realize the Real, the fearless goal, the abode of Bliss…. Both believe in the established canon of logic that it is the unreal alone which can be negated. For both, that which is negated in <em>avidyā</em>, the imposed empirical character of the ‘I’, and that which is retained is the Absolute. Both use the negative dialectic, the ‘<em>neti neti</em>’ (not this, not this) for indirectly pointing to the nature of the Inexpressible. All the epithets which the Upanishadic seers use for <em>Ātmā</em> or Brahma (or their synonyms) Buddha uses for <em>Nirvāṇa</em>. <em>Ātmā</em> and <em>Nirvāṇa</em> both stand for the ineffable non-dual Absolute. It must, however, be admitted that while the Upaniṣadic seers openly identify the Absolute with the Pure Self which is at once pure consciousness and bliss, Buddha, true to his negative logic, does not expressly identify the Absolute with the Pure Self, though the implication is clearly there. He identifies the Absolute with <em>Nirvāṇa</em>. Buddha’s omission to identify the Absolute with the Transcendent Self has led to the misunderstanding of his <em>anātmavāda</em>. But though Buddha does not expressly identify the Absolute with the Pure Self, nowhere has he expressly denied it. His descriptions of <em>Nirvāṇa</em> are similar to the descriptions of the Upaniṣadic <em>Ātmā</em> and leave no doubt that he is carrying on the tradition of the Upaniṣadic absolutism.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">- Sharma (2007: 31-32) (<em>diacritics/spellings and italics as in the original</em>).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-020">
			<p>19  “At first sight nothing can appear more definite than the opposition of the Buddhist an-attā, 'no-Ātman,' and the Brāhman ātman, the sole reality. But in using the same term, Attā or Ātman, Buddhist and Brāhman are talking of different things, and when this is realized, it will be seen that the Buddhist disputations on this point lose nearly all their value. It is frankly admitted by Professor Rhys Davids that,</p>
			<p>‘The neuter Brahman is, so far as I am aware, entirely unknown in the Nikāyas, and of course the Buddha's idea of Brahmā, in the masculine, really differs widely from that of the Upanishads.’</p>
			<p>There is nothing, then, to show that the Buddhists ever really understood the pure doctrine of the Ātman, which is ‘not so, not so’. The attack which they led upon the idea of soul or self is directed against the conception of the eternity in time of an unchanging individuality; of the timeless spirit they do not speak, and yet they claim to have disposed of the theory of the Ātman! In reality both sides were in agreement that the soul or ego (manas, ahamkāra, vijñāna, etc.) is complex and phenomenal, while of that which is ‘not so’ we know nothing.”</p>
			<p class="text-right">- Coomaraswamy (1916: 199) (<em>diacritics/spellings and italics as in the original</em>)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-004-en-021">
			<p>20  “‘Hence let a man take care to himself. A man who steals gold, who drinks spirits, who dishonors his Guru’s bed, who kills a Brāhman, these four falls, and as a fifth he who associates with them. But he who thus knows the five fires [Pañcāgni] is not defiled by sin even though he associates with them. He who knows this is pure, clean, and obtains the world of the blessed.’ Herein one can trace the origin of Pārsvanātha’s doctrine of four-fold restraint (cāujjāma saṁvara), Mahāvira’s five great vows (pañea mahāvvayas) and of Buddha’s five moral percepts (pañca-śīlas).”</p>
			<p class="text-right">- Barua (1921: 96) (<em>diacritics/spellings and italics as in the original</em>)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-fn-001">
			<p>*pp. 163--188. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism.</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-002">
			<p>1 However, the <em>vaidika</em>-s question the Buddhists about the basis of their belief in the doctrine of <em>karma</em> when they reject the authority of the Veda.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-003">
			<p>2 Gruen (1990: 79-123). However, Malhotra (2016) points out that there are more differences between Roman and Indian cultures than similarities, so such parallels need not necessarily be true.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-004">
			<p>3 This understanding is thanks to Dr. Rama Phaniraj.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-005">
			<p>4 It may be the case that Newton’s formula of the force of attraction between two masses $m_1$ and $m_2$ separated by distance $r$ given by $F = G m_1 m_2/r^2$ might need correction in some cases, but the fundamental existence of the force of gravitation itself is unnegatable.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-006">
			<p>5 “<em>Prorsus credibile est, quia ineptum est</em>” can be translated: “it is by all means to be believed, because it is absurd”. The context is a defence of the tenets of orthodox Christianity against docetism:” The Son of God was crucified: there is no shame, because it is shameful. And the Son of God died: it is by all means to be believed, because it is absurd. And, buried, He rose again: it is certain, because impossible.” — (De Carne Christi 5·4) (Connor 2014: 140)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-007">
			<p>6 This actually follows from Aristotlean logic, about which Robinson says “The scenario Aristotle is imagining is one in which there is an incredibly unlikely event in the past that the rhetor wants or needs to claim actually happened; to that end the rhetoric should invoke its very improbability (unlikelihood, incredibility) as an argument in favor of the story’s accuracy, its truthiness.” Robinson (2016: 236).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-008">
			<p>7 A common example given for the sake of understanding is — we see the Sun rising and setting everyday, but science says the Sun is stationary in the solar system; and we understand through the help of science that it is the rotation of the Earth which makes the Sun appear to rise in the East and set in the West.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-009">
			<p>8 As the <em>śruti</em> is in line with <em>anubhava</em> (everybody’s common experience), so should <em>yukti</em> (logic) be in line with <em>śruti</em>.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-005-en-010">
			<p>9 It might be argued that the existence of other <em>loka</em>-s and cannot be verified by experience; but if one’s daily experience of different time-space realms in waking and dream, in deep-sleep, and the continuity of the individual’s existence across the three states is analyzed carefully, one cannot reject the possibility of other <em>loka</em>-s and <em>punar-janman</em>.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-006-fn-001">
			<p>* pp. 189--209. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism.</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-fn-001">
			<p>* pp. 211--259. In: Kannan, K. S. and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism.</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India. </p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-002">
			<p>1 Pollock is aware of the contentious nature of his prescribed dates. He pre-emptively states: ‘even the dates I have given for framing the limits of its (Pollock 1996: 197) origin and dissolution may be disputed’ and then pushes forward without providing any discussion on, or resolution of, this dispute.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-fn-003">
			<p>* Originally written in German. Extract from the translation is presented in italics in the main text.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-004">
			<p>2 Here are some additional notes about Baldev Upadhyaya worth mentioning. O’Hanlon (2010) has referred to Upadhyaya’s work and so has Aklujkar in his articles which appear in <em>The Paṇḍit</em>. Aklujkar considers Upadhyaya’s work as the best source to know about the Kashi Paṇḍits. He also acknowledges Sinha’s work on Bengal Paṇḍits as the best work to refer to for Paṇḍits of Bengal. As a matter for research, it would be meaningful to compare and contrast the life-style of the Paṇḍits from two different parts of India, contemporaneous or not.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-005">
			<p>3 Upadhyaya (1982: 834--850)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-006">
			<p>4 The note reads: “Dear Sir, I have a pleasure in sending you the photos of the Emperor Wilhelm I, the founder of the German Empire and of his grandson, our present Emperor. I wish you health and long life. Your most obedient servant, Gruf Konigs Mark (signed).”</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-007">
			<p>5 Upadhyaya (1982: 77--85)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-008">
			<p>6 Upadhyaya (1982: 873--881)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-009">
			<p>7 Upadhyaya (1982: 791--806)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-007-en-010">
			<p>8 Another example is that of Paṇḍit Krishnadev Upadhyaya. He taught Vedānta Philosophy to W. H. Mill of the Bishop college.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-fn-001">
			<p>* pp. 261--285. In: Kannan, K. S and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism.</em> Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-002">
			<p>1  The official emblem of Nazis, the ‘Swastika’ was adopted by Hitler himself, who declared in his Mein Kampf, that represented, “…the fight for the victory of the Aryan man and at the same time for the victory of the idea of creative work, which in itself always was and always will be anti-Semitic.” (Cited in Murphy <em>et al</em>, p. 87). There is really nothing particularly Aryan about Swastika, as it is attested even in Harappan contexts (deemed as ‘pre-Vedic’ by Indologists) as well as in African and many other cultures.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-003">
			<p>2 Rosenberg himself preferred the word “Nordic” to “Aryan”, unlike other Nazi ideologues. In fact, “Aryan” and its cognates are scarcely attested in non-Indo-Iranian languages.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-004">
			<p>3 Within the Indian context however, Christianity aligned itself with Orientalist scholarship to project British colonialism as a ‘civilizing mission’ of the barbarian Hindu who practiced ‘evil idolatry’ and ‘oppressed the lower castes’.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-005">
			<p>4 However, Rosenberg reserved his worst animus for Catholicism, and appreciated Lutheran Protestantism for condemning the former (Fitzgerald 2013: 22 sqq.) but nevertheless objected to Christianity not recognizing racial superiority of the Aryan race.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-006">
			<p>5 Venkat (2007) points out that the <em>New Testament</em> itself has over 450 anti-Semitic references.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-007">
			<p>6 See Cornwell (2000). Apologists like Bergman (2012) however absolve Christianity by arguing that the Nazi Aryan Myth derived from Darwinism, that the Nazis bore an antipathy to Catholicism in general, and that even the anti-Semitism of Martin Luther resulted from this illness in his last years (<em>ibid</em>, pp. 306-312).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-008">
			<p>7 A simple google search will reveal Wust’s deep Nazi connections but Pollock (1993) is sufficient. There are not many publications on this important subject, and when Pollock was writing the above article, only some German Indologists were willing to help him. See <a href="https://groups.yahoo.com/neo/groups/INDOLOGY/conversations/topics/919">https://groups.yahoo.com/neo/groups/INDOLOGY/conversations/topics/919</a> for this revelation.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-009">
			<p>8 Conversely, their attitude towards anyone challenging their own views is to lump ‘the Hindu other’ as a ‘Hindu Nationalist’ (and by implication, a ‘Muslim killer’, and ‘Hindu Nazi’).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-010">
			<p>9 For instance, see Witzel (1995: 312).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-011">
			<p>10 Other Nazi Indologists include Paul Thieme. Wilhelm Hauer, Ludwig Alsdorf, Ernst Schneider, Hermann Lommel, Richard Schmidt and many others – all big names in German Indology, cited with reverence even today. See Pollock (1993).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-012">
			<p>11 Chakrabarti, 1999:37. Aryanism has taken its toll not only on European countries but also in Asia and Africa. A recent study on Iran demonstrates how the Aryan Myth is being used in Iran to further the hegemony of Farsi speakers at the cost of Azeri and other minorities. See Asgharzadeh (2007).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-013">
			<p>12 Day, p. 74 sqq., 133-134, 179-184 etc. for Indo-Aryan speakers.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-014">
			<p>13 See for instance, Deshpande (2006: 102-103).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-015">
			<p>14 See Chitalwala (1984) and Kenoyer (1998), pages 26, 44, 126 etc.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-016">
			<p>15 Wakankar (1988), Ramgopal Shastri (1985), Erdosy (1989), Chaubey (1993) etc.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-017">
			<p>16 Schetelich (1990), Levitt (1989).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-018">
			<p>17 See Arvind Sharma (2000) for a detailed overview.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-019">
			<p>18 See also <em>Suśruta Saṁhitā</em>, Sūtrasthāna 2.5 which gives the opinion of ‘other teachers’ that <em>śūdra</em>-s can be educated in all branches of learning except the Mantra portion of the Veda--s, and without being invested with the sacred thread.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-020">
			<p>19 See Poewe and Hexham (2015), <em>in passim.</em></p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-021">
			<p>20 In fact, whereas the Jews formed barely 1&#37; of Germany’s population, <em>śūdra</em>-s formed a significant chunk, if not the majority of Āryāvarta’s population.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-022">
			<p>21 See the commentaries of Śabara, Kumārila and Prabhākara on <em>Jaimini Sūtra</em>-s 1.3.10.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-023">
			<p>*Editor's Note: This is in <em>Aitareya Brāhmaṇa</em> 8.1 (Śaśtrī 1942:304) (Saśtrī, Anantakrisna. (1942). <em>Aitareya Brāhmaṇa.</em> Trivandrum: University of Travancore)</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-024">
			<p>22 See also <em>Aitareya Brāhmaṇa</em> 36.4 and <em>Śatapatha Brāhmaṇa</em> 1.1.4.12 for <em>śūdra</em> participation in acts of <em>yajña</em>-s.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-008-en-025">
			<p>23 In fact, this is an example why our interpretation of Jaimini’s <em>sūtra</em>-s regarding <em>śūdra</em>-s’ right to perform <em>yajña</em>-s is admissible because the <em>Kalpasūtra</em>-s typically debar the Rathakāra from <em>yajña</em>-s, whereas Jaimini clearly gives them this right. See Minkowski (1989).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-009-en-001">
			<p>*pp. 287–312. In: Kannan, K. S and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism</em>. Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-fn-001">
			<p>*pp. 313–330. In: Kannan, K. S and Meera, H. R. (Ed.s) (2021). <em>Chronology and Causation: Negating Neo-Orientalism</em>. Chennai: Infinity Foundation India.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-en-002">
			<p>1 Unless stated otherwise <strong>emphasis</strong> (bold) found in the various quoted quotations found at various parts of this text was added by the author.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-en-003">
			<p>2 This completely contradicts the hypothesis of oppressive kingship.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-en-004">
			<p>3 Madras Presidency included the present-day Tamilnadu, major parts of Andhra Pradesh and Telangana as well as some districts of Karnataka, Kerala and Orissa. See Dharampal (2000: 29--32) for details.</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-en-005">
			<p>4 Ironically, <em>Conicoply</em> (Kanakku Pillai) has morphed into a caste-by-birth in spite of the offices being manned by various different communities until two or three generations ago. (Dirks 2011).</p>
		</aside>
		<aside epub:type="footnote" id="id-010-en-006">
			<p>5 According to Sufi philosophy, ““ego” (nafs) is the lowest dimension of man’s inward existence, his animal and satanic nature” (Chittick 1983:12). However, it is an important concept as well in the gnosis (irfan) discipline in Shia Islam.</p>
		</aside>
	</div>
</body>
</html>
