<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Western Indology &amp; Its Quest For Power</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-oc1">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span id="page257" title="257" epub:type="pagebreak" role="doc-pagebreak"/><span>Acknowledgements</span></h1>
		<p class="text-body">Our conferences could not have happened without the active support and participation of our volunteers and well-wishers.</p>
		<p class="text-body">We wish to thank Sri Udaykumar and his team from the Vande Mataram Student Circle at IIT-Madras for their help in making full arrangements for the first conference at Chennai. Sri Jithu Aravamudhan and Smt. Lakshmi Sarma of the IFI group of volunteers also deserve our hearty thanks for their active participation. Ms. Ruchi Sood and her team of volunteers as also Smt. Shilpa Memani, Sri Abhishek Jalan, Sri Roushan Rajput and Sri Divyanshu Bawa made no small efforts in making the New Delhi conference a success.</p>
		<p class="text-body">Our gratitude is due to Sri Ramnik Khurana, Sri Sanjeev Chhibber, and Sri Chetan Handa who have kindly offered to bear the expenses of bringing out these volumes in print. We wish to thank Sri Sunil Sheoran who has been a long-time supporter of our work. His help in coordinating the printing of these volumes is deeply appreciated.</p>
		<p class="text-body">We are grateful to all the paper-presenters and the keen audience for maintaining a high academic standard and decorum at the conference. There of course are many more who have helped us and guided us behind the screen and deserve our thanks.</p>
		<p class="text-body">IFI Team</p>
		<div class="float-right">
		<strong>IFI Team</strong>
		</div>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
