<?xml version="1.0" encoding="UTF-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xml:lang="en" lang="en"
	xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops">
<head>
   <title>Western Indology &amp; Its Quest For Power</title>
   <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="css/style.css" />
</head>
<body>
	<section class="level1 unnumbered" epub:type="chapter" role="doc-chapter" id="id-prf3">
		<h1 class="level1-title" epub:type="title"><span>Our Key Partners</span></h1>
		<p>The organisers of the conference are indebted to the various~institutions  and individuals for the invaluable help rendered by them, without which this  work would just not have been possible. It is a pleasure to thank them  heartily for the same.</p>  
		<p>We are indebted to our individual and institutional sponsors: Sri Mohandas Pai  and Foundation for Indian Civilization Studies, Sri MV Subbiah and Vellayan Chettiar  Trust, Sri J K Jhaver, Sri Kiron Shah, Indira Gandhi National Centre for the Arts (IGNCA),  Sri Rakesh Bhandari, and Sri Nagesh Bhandari and Indus University. Without all their  financial support and help we would not have been able to attract the high level of  scholarship that has contributed to this volume.</p>  
		<p>We are grateful to IIT-Madras and IGNCA, New Delhi for organizing the Swadeshi  Indology Conferences 1 and 2 respectively. In particular, we are thankful to  Prof. Devendra Jalihal and his colleagues at IITM, Sri Ram Bahadur Rai, Chairman  IGNCA, Sri Sachchidanand Joshi, Member Secretary IGNCA, Sri Aravinda Rao,  Smt. Sonal Mansingh and their team at IGNCA.  The teams at these institutions  put in enormous efforts to make the conferences a success and we owe them a  huge debt of gratitude for the same.</p>
	</section>
</body>
</html>
